SOP node helpdesk ticket classification (#49)
GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures: sops/node-specific/GDI-SOP0008_node-helpdesk-ticket-classification.md

Reviewer: (Will add review comments a.s.a.p.)

Author: Thank you! Take into consideration that it is a living document that changes all the time! :-) But more feedback can help us to come to a better and more improved version of the SOP.

Reviewer: The remarks and questions that I had collected based on a previous version of this SOP have all been implemented already and from my point of view resulted in a very compete and to the point SOP.

I do have a few questions:

- In step 1 the issue is evaluated. 
Could the following scenario be addressed in this SOP, or should it be caught in the VHD before it is passe on to the node HD?: A ticket does not provide enough information to complete the classification, or the issue can be classified and is in scope but can not be handled with the limited information that is provided, how does that fit in the process. Do we want to add some details for this in this specific SOP or is this an exception that could perhaps be handled in another SOP? 

- About the tags; Do we know if, and if so, what tags are already applied to the tickets that are received and passed on by the VHD? (and is this based on the same classification)

- And I have one more question; I do not seem to see e.g. the term 'bug' or 'feature request' in the list 'Type of ticket'. Do we derive this form the ‘Type of ticket’? This could be relevant for further handling of the issue and communication about the issue?

Author: Thank you for your review and valuable feedback!

Regarding the **first question**: I’m not sure how to respond. I guess the VHD must handle this issue before forwarding it to the node HD. If there is an unspecified issue due to limited information, how can they forward to node HD something so unclear?

Regarding the **second question**: This is an excellent point and something we’ve also considered within our small team (Mattias, Silvia and I). Unfortunately, there isn’t a clear answer to this, as we’re unsure about the procedures the VHD will follow. We assumed they wouldn’t tag the issue with highly detailed tags but rather use a single tag for the node. For example, if the issue pertains to Sweden, the only tag would be the Swedish node. Since we (the Swedish node) will be the ones handling the ticket, it seems more appropriate for us to set the specific tags that best suit the handling of the issue.

Regarding the **third question**: This is another good point! However, I’m not sure if it’s a question for the node HD. I’m not very technical and don’t have deep knowledge of the technical aspects. For example, is it possible for a bug to only affect the "Swedish" platform, or is it always something more central? The same applies to "feature requests". From my limited experience with the FEGA Sweden HD, when there’s a bug or feature request, we contact the central EGA, as it’s not something we fix ourselves. That said, I’m not entirely sure how this will work with the GDI.

I guess that @M-casado and @silviabah can eventually add some more comments to this discussion!

Reviewer 2: Re. the ``bug`` or ``feature request``, would those issues be given to the NHD, or managed internally at the VHD level? I would expect that GDI-wide issues are not given to individual nodes to resolve, unless the VHD sent the same issue to every single node, for the NHD to address at each one as they saw fit.

That also makes me wonder if truly the VHD will not have tags. From the technical POV, the tagging system at VHD would also exist. Not with the same tags as the NHD, that is, but metadata about the ticketing system would exist, in my opinion.

Reviewer: Hello Elisavet,

Thank you for your response to my questions.

While working on the VHD SOP ‘Respond to Bug Issues’ I also found that a sort of classification could/should take place at the VHD. That could/should solve the issue mentioned in the first question (incomplete tickets) and a list with relevant tags can be included in that SOP also (covering the second question and if possible, the third question).

Also, I observed many details added to the SOP in the meanwhile. They make it an even more complete document that will support the user in a very practical manner and result in a more efficient handling of tickets.

4. [Purpose](#4-purpose)

5. [Scope](#5-scope)

6. [Introduction and Background Information](#6-introduction-and-background-information)

7. [Summary or Context Diagram](#7-summary-or-context-diagram)

8. [Procedure](#8-procedure)

9. [References](#9-references)

### 1. Document History

| Template Version | Instance version | Author(s) | Description of changes | Date |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|  ``v1``  |  | Elisavet Torstensson, Mattias Strömberg, Silvia Bahena| Created the first version of the SOP | 2025.02.04 |

### 2. Glossary

Find GDI SOPs common Glossary at the [charter document](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/blob/main/docs/GDI-SOP_charter.md).

| Abbreviation |  Description |
|---|---|
| EBI | European Bioinformatics Institute |
| EMBL | European Molecular Biology Laboratory |
| GDI | Genomic Data Infrastructure |
| ISM | Information Service Management |
| NBIS | National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden |
| NHD | Node Helpdesk |
| ORR | Organisational Roles and Responsibilities |
| SOP | Standard Operating Procedure |
| UU | University of Uppsala |
| VHD | Virtual Helpdesk  |

| Term | Definition |
|---|---|

> | Node Helpdesk | The support team is responsible for handling tickets related to data management issues associated with the node in the GDI Project.  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Node Helpdesk | The support team responsible for handling tickets related to data management issues associated with the node in the GDI Project. |
```

> | Ticket | Incoming issues from the GDI Virtual Helpdesk, are to be processed within the Node Helpdesk and, after that, returned to the Virtual Helpdesk |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Ticket | Incoming issues from the GDI Virtual Helpdesk that are to be processed within the Node Helpdesk and, after that, returned to the Virtual Helpdesk |
```

> | Ticket Classification | The process of categorising support requests is based on their nature so that they can be assigned to the appropriate individual or team for resolution.  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Ticket Classification | The process of categorising support requests based on their nature, so they can be assigned to the appropriate individual or team for resolution.  |
```

| Role | Full name | GDI/node role | Organisation |
|---|---|---|---|
| Author | Elisavet Torstensson | Task 4.3 member  | UU-NBIS |
| Author | Mattias Strömberg | Task 4.3 member  | UU-NBIS |
| Author | Silvia Bahena | Task 4.3 member  | EMBL-EBI |
| Reviewer | Marcos Casado Barbero  | Task 4.3 Lead | EMBL-EBI  |
| Approver |  |  |  |
| Authorizer |  |  |  |

### 4. Purpose

Each GDI Node Helpdesk (NHD) provides support to its users by using a dedicated system (ticket management system) to respond to users with various issues or requests.

The purpose of this Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is to provide clear guidelines for classifying tickets in a consistent and efficient manner in the node’s dedicated system. Proper ticket classification ensures that requests are routed to the appropriate teams, and prioritised accurately. This SOP aims to optimize resource allocation, improve response time and enhance overall customer satisfaction.

### 5. Scope

> This SOP outlines the process for classifying tickets at the **node level** received from the Virtual Helpdesk (VHD) using a classification model and registering them in the node's internal ticket management system. The SOP covers all steps, from the reference of the ticket from the VHD to its categorisation of a corresponding issue in the dedicated system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This SOP outlines the process for classifying tickets, at the **node level**, that were received from the Virtual Helpdesk (VHD). The approach is to use a classification model and register the tickets in the node's internal ticket management system. This SOP covers the steps between the initial reference of the ticket from the VHD, to its categorisation as a corresponding issue in the dedicated system.
```

Below is defined the importance of creating custom tags for the ticket management system:

- **Classification and Prioritisation:** Tags help sort and prioritise tickets based on specific attributes or statuses.

- **Targeted Searches and Reports:** Tags enable precise filtering and custom reporting, focusing on relevant ticket aspects.

- **Enhanced Communication and Coordination:** Tags clarify ticket statuses and denote special handling requirements, improving team communication.

- **Streamlined Workflows:** Tags support automated workflows and ensure consistent ticket management practices.

- **Tracking and Reporting**: Tags aid in tracking performance metrics and analysing ticket trends for process improvements.	

- **Increased Efficiency:** Tags facilitate quick access to tickets and enable focused resolution of critical issues.

### 7. Summary or Context Diagram

This is a proposed workflow for how the ticket will be classified at the Node level.

> ````mermaid
> flowchart TD
> A[Receive Ticket from VHD] --> B{Evaluate Ticket Scope}
> B -->|Positive Evaluation| C[Create New Issue in Node Ticket Management System]
> C --> D[Assign Tags to Ticket
> Tags: 1.Type 2.Priority 3.Assignee 4.Status]
> D --> E[Follow SOP for NHD Ticket Handling]
> B -->|Negative Evaluation| G[Create New Issue in Node Ticket Management System for Documentation]
> G --> H[Inform VHD of Out-of-Scope Decision, Provide Explanation and Close Issue with Notes]
> ````

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
````mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Virtual_Helpdesk
        A[Ticket]
    end

    subgraph Node_Helpdesk
        A -->|Receive Ticket from VHD| B{Evaluate
                                        Ticket Scope}
        subgraph Ticket Management System
            C[Create Issue in Node Ticket Management System]
            F[Create 'Documentation' Issue in Node Ticket Management System]
        end                                        
        B -->|Positive Evaluation| C
        C --> D[Assign Tags: Type, Priority, Assignee, Status]
        D --> E[Follow NHD SOP for Ticket Handling]

        B -->|Negative Evaluation| F
        F --> D
    end

    E -->|Update VHD on Ticket Resolution| Virtual_Helpdesk
    F -->|Inform VHD of Out-of-Scope Decision| Virtual_Helpdesk
````
```

| Ticket | Incoming issues from the GDI Virtual Helpdesk that are to be processed within the Node Helpdesk and, after that, returned to the Virtual Helpdesk |
| Ticket Classification | The process of categorising support requests based on their nature, so they can be assigned to the appropriate individual or team for resolution.  |
| Virtual Helpdesk  | The initial point of contact for inquiries and requests related to data management in the GDI project. |
| XML  | Extensible Markup Language is a markup language and file format for storing, transmitting, and reconstructing data. |

### 3. Roles and Responsibilities

See the qualifications and responsibilities of the roles in the [Organisational Roles and Responsibilities](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/blob/main/docs/GDI-SOP_organisational-roles-and-responsibilities.md) document.

| Role | Full name | GDI/node role | Organisation |
|---|---|---|---|
| Author | Elisavet Torstensson | Task 4.3 member  | UU-NBIS |
| Author | Mattias Strömberg | Task 4.3 member  | UU-NBIS |
| Author | Silvia Bahena | Task 4.3 member  | EMBL-EBI |

> | Reviewer | Marcos Casado Barbero  | Task 4.3 Lead | EMBL-EBI  |

Reviewer 2: Remember to add Bianca too.

        D --> E[Follow NHD SOP for Ticket Handling]
        B -->|Negative Evaluation| F
        F --> D
    end
    E -->|Notify VHD of ticket resolution; for negative evaluations, inform them it’s out-of-scope.| Virtual_Helpdesk
   
````

### 8. Procedure

#### 8.1. Evaluating a Ticket from the VHD

| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|
| ``1`` | After receiving a ticket from the VHD and **within 7 working days** | Helpdesk officer  |

The NHD receives a ticket from the VHD requiring action by the specific node. The ticket is evaluated **within 7 working days** to determine whether it is **within the node's scope** (positive evaluation) **or not** (negative evaluation).

A ticket is considered **positively evaluated** if all the following criteria are met: 
- < node's scope criteria 1>
- < node's scope criteria 2>
- < node's scope criteria 3>
- etc

Proceed to [step 2](#82--positive-evaluation---create-issue-in-node-ticket-management-system)
  
A ticket is considered **negatively evaluated** if any of the following criteria apply:
- < node's scope criteria 1>
- < node's scope criteria 2>
- < node's scope criteria 3>
- etc

> Proceed to [step 3](#83--negative-evaluation---create-documentation-issue-in-node-ticket-management-system)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A ticket is considered **positively evaluated** if all the following criteria are met: 
   - ``< node's scope criteria 1>``
   - ``< node's scope criteria 2>``
   - ``< node's scope criteria 3>``
   - etc

   - If positively evaluated, proceed to **[step 2](#82--positive-evaluation---create-issue-in-node-ticket-management-system)**
  
- A ticket is considered **negatively evaluated** if any of the following criteria apply:
   - ``< node's scope criteria 1>``
   - ``< node's scope criteria 2>``
   - ``< node's scope criteria 3>``
   - etc

   - If negatively evaluated, proceed to **[step 3](#83--negative-evaluation---create-documentation-issue-in-node-ticket-management-system)**
```

#### 8.2.  Positive Evaluation - Create issue in Node Ticket Management System

| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|
|  ``2`` | After step 1, if the evaluation is positive, and **within 7 working days**| Helpdesk officer |

> If the ticket is within the scope of the NHD (positive evaluation), a **new issue** will be created in the designated system to record the ticket's arrival and document the positive evaluation. 

Reviewer 2: As per the [GDI-SOP_style-guide.md](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/blob/main/docs/GDI-SOP_style-guide.md), I would phrase it more like "If ..., then **create** a new issue ..."

In my experience we should try to address the reader as the one executing the SOP. Otherwise it may be that the person reading thinks "Oh, a new issue will be created? Good, good, someone else may do it, or may be done automatically I guess". (?)

Reviewer 2: We can also add some reference like "... create a new issue following your nodes' system ..." or similar

Author: I have updated the content based on your suggestions! :-)

Proceed to [step 4](#84-assign-tags)

#### 8.3.  Negative Evaluation - Create Documentation issue in Node Ticket Management System 

| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|
| ``3`` | After step 1, if the evaluation is negative, and **within 7 working days** | Helpdesk officer |

> If the ticket is out of the scope of the NHD (negative evaluation), a **new documentation issue** will be created in the dedicated system to record the ticket's arrival and document the negative evaluation.

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

Proceed to [step 4](#84-assign-tags)

#### 8.4. Assign Tags

| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|

> | ``4`` | After creating a new issue or documentation issue in Node Ticket Management System and **within 7 working days** | Helpdesk officer |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| ``4`` | After creating a new issue in the Node Ticket Management System and **within 7 working days** | Helpdesk officer |
```

Reviewer 2: I still think that the specific mention of documentation issue is not needed.

The next step after creating the appropriate issue in the Node Ticket Management System is to **assign tags**. 

> If the evaluation of the ticket was **positive** then: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the evaluation of the ticket at [step 1](#81-evaluating-a-ticket-from-the-vhd) was **positive** then: 
```

Reviewer 2: For these suggestions to be effective you'll need to click on "Commit suggestion", rather than resolve conversation.

Reviewer 2: Otherwise they don't take effect.

- Proceed to [step 4.1](#841-choose-tags-for-positive-evaluation).

> If the evaluation of the ticket was **negative** then: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the evaluation of the ticket at [step 1](#81-evaluating-a-ticket-from-the-vhd) was **negative** then: 
```

Reviewer 2: Same.

- Proceed to [step 4.2](#842-choose-tags-for-negative-evaluation).

##### 8.4.1 Choose tags for positive evaluation
| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|
| ``4.1`` | Following the creation of the issue after a positive ticket evaluation | Helpdesk officer |

> Each ticket will be classified with **four tags** as described below: 

Reviewer 2: Same as above, I would phrase it as "... **Classify** each ticket ..."

1. [**Type of ticket**](#type-of-ticket): Specifies the type of ticket.

2. [**Ticket Priority**](#ticket-priority): Specifies the ticket's priority level.

3. [**Ticket Assignee**](#ticket-assignee): Specifies who is responsible for resolving the ticket.

4. [**Ticket Status**](#ticket-status): Specifies the ticket's status (initially set to "New").

> * #### Type of ticket

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Type of ticket
```

Reviewer 2: Besides the comment in the thread about reformulating the headers, I noticed that you had ``*`` at the beginning of this one. That turns it into a bullet point rather than a header.

> Based on EGA’s tag system, below is a list of tags that can be used by the node HD in the GDI to classify tickets according to **the type of ticket.** Each node will decide which of these tags to use for ticket classification in their node HD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Find below a list of tags to use as the GDI NHD to classify tickets according to **the type of ticket**. This list is derived from EGA's internal HD system. You can choose to use tags from this list or decide which tags to use for ticket classification at your NHD.
```

Reviewer 2: Also, I would recommend to add a reference to the fact that tickets may have multiple tags associated with them, not just 1.

> Based on EGA’s tag system, below is a list of tags that can be used by the node HD in the GDI to classify tickets according to **the type of ticket.** Each node will decide which of these tags to use for ticket classification in their node HD.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below is a list of tags proposed for use by GDI NHDs to classify tickets by type. This list is derived from EGA’s internal Helpdesk system and is intended as a set of examples to provide guidance and inspiration.

Each node is encouraged to define and adapt its own set of tags based on the specific needs of its system or service.
```

Author: @silviabah Nice! I updated this part according to your suggestion. Unfortunately, this suggestion was outdated, and I could not press the button commit suggestion, but I did it manually. The problem is that I have not seen some of the changes you mentioned about creating tables for the tag. I think you should make the changes, not only suggest them as it might be the same problem! :-)

- **Out-of-scope**

  - Issues that are out-of-scope of the nodes' helpdesk  

- **UX**

  - Development feedback - to be used when a user provides feedback about our tools

  - Documentation improvement - to be used when a user highlights our documentation is wrong/out of date/not clear

>   - Interface issue - to be used when issue with web pages

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to me which ones are the Tags to use. I would change the format (e.g., ``out-of-scope``) and/or mention somewhere the format of this list (e.g., _for each tag you'll have examples of ..._)

Reviewer 2: What I mean is that, I don't know if I'm to use ``UX`` as a tag, or ``Development feedback``, for example, as a tag within the ``UX`` category.

Author: I understand what you mean. To be honest, it was Silvia who suggested this list because they use it at EGA. I guess that @silviabah has a better understanding of this part. Can you, Silvia, update or explain this part with the tags in the document and how we can use them? Thank you!

Reviewer 2: My gut feeling is that the tags are ``UX``, and the second level of bullet points are just examples of things that are included in those tags. But we can wait for @silviabah to comment

Reviewer 2: This is still not addressed, right?

Author: No, it is not addressed yet! I guess that @silviabah can have a look! :-)

Reviewer 3: Regarding the tags, we can clarify that the list provided is intended as a set of examples meant to serve as guidance or inspiration. Each node should define and tailor its own list of tags according to the specific needs of its system or service. Therefore, it's not necessary to be too specific about the meaning of each tag, as their interpretation may vary across implementations.

Author: For me, it sounds good! Would you (@silviabah) like to write 1-2 sentences before the tabs regarding what you mentioned?

  - Uploader issue - use when user is having issue with Aspera or FTP upload

  - Encryption Issue - user needs advice on file encryption

  - Large submission - to be used if submission is over 10TB

  - Missing study/dataset on live - to be used when user highlights study/dataset is published but not released

  - Phenotype data - to be used for phenotype data submission

  - Priority submission - use in conjunction with consortium from tags further down

  - Publication ID query - use for when people are asking how to generate accession IDs for journal

  - Study/dataset release - releasing a study/dataset to live site

  - Programmatic Submission problem - to be used with programmatic submitters who are having issues with their XML

  - Submitter portal issue - to be used when there is issue with SP

  - JSON submission issue

* **Submission Type**

  - AF processing issue - HD unable to process AF due to commands not working i.e., requires a developer to change code

  - AF processing template - user not completed the AF template correctly

- **User** 

  - Data query - to be used when a user has a specific question about the data 

>   - General question - general questions about EGA e.g., “where are you based?”

Reviewer 2: Probably would phrase it differently, as in questions about your node or GDI (?)

  - Non - user data request - user that does not have access to a dataset and needs to be told how to access. 

  - Password issue - user having an issue with their password

>   - User account

Reviewer 2: I guess there's a ``-related issues`` missing

       - API Download - to be used 

       - Dataset/file requesting issues

       - Decryption/unzipping problems

       - Download streamer

       - Download streamer 500

       - Download streamer issues

       - Firewall issues

       - Log in problems

       - Null/Sleeping timeout errors

       - Download client issues

       - User error
    
       - Version issue

- **DAC** 

  - DAC tool query - to be used when DAC is having issues with tools 

  - DAC curation - to  be used when we do DAC curation, and update DACs for DACs i.e., change DAC members

  - Update DAC - use for contact and detail changes

  - DAC referred - to be used when we have to point a user back to a DAC e.g., they say they have been granted access but we can’t see that they have

  - DAC request to create account - DAC requesting to creating a user account

* **Archiving**

  - Data deposition - Archiving issue

  - Archiving state - file is still processing somewhere

  - Failed state - file has failed to archive

  - Tags for different files status 

- **External Comms**

  - Journal communications - to be used when in communication with Journals

* **Security**

>   - EGA security issues - to be used if there is a security breach

Reviewer 2: Similar as above, I don't think it's relevant for GDI this example, so I would phrase it as GDI Security issues or similar.

- **Delete**

  - Non - issue - to be used when user has submitted a ticket with an issue, and then replied to the ticket saying “all ok after all” before we have had chance to reply

  - Spam

* **Consortium**

>   - Tags for different consortiums

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Archiving

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Archiving status | File is still processing in the archive |
| Data deposition - Archiving issue | Issue with archiving during deposition |
| Failed status | File has failed to archive |

### DAC

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| DAC curation | We do DAC curation or update DAC members |
| DAC referred | User pointed back to DAC for access or clarification |
| DAC request  | DAC request |
| Update DAC | Contact and detail changes in DAC |

### Distribution

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| File issues | Truncated or missing files from a dataset |
| Metadata issues | User asking for more info on metadata or its structure |
| Metadata query | User asking how to download or understand metadata |

### Download Issues

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| API Download | Issue related to API-based download |
| Alternative Download | User cannot download using any of our tools |
| Dataset/file requesting issues | Problems requesting specific datasets/files |
| Datasets/files request not in client | Files not available with the download tool |
| Decryption/unzipping problems | Issues with decrypting or unzipping files |
| Download client issues | General issues with the download client |
| Firewall issues | Download issues caused by firewalls |
| Key request | Request for decryption keys |
| Log in problems | Problems logging into download client or portal |
| Null/Sleeping timeout errors | Timeout-related errors during download |
| User error | Errors due to user actions |
| Version issue | Problems due to client version |

### External Communications

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Journal communications | Communications with journals |

### Issue Tracking

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| JIRA | To be used when you need to create a JIRA ticket for an issue that Helpdesk cannot resolve and requires dev involment |

### Other

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Consortium | Tags related to different consortiums |
| Non - issue | User submitted a ticket but later said the issue was resolved |

### Scope & Feedback

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Documentation improvement | To be used when a user highlights our documentation is wrong/out of date/not clear |
| Interface issue | To be used when there is an issue with web pages |
| Out-of-scope | Issues that are out-of-scope of the nodes' helpdesk and are redirected to VHD if required|
| UX | Development feedback - to be used when a user provides feedback about service tools |

### Security

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| GDI security issues | Security-related issues in GDI |

### Submission

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| API - Submission | To be used when a submitter is using the submission API |
| Data deposition | User submitting data |
| Data deposition intention | To be used when initial submission request comes in |
| Data deposition policy documents | To be used when users query if their DAA is OK or ask questions about DAA |
| Data deposition problem | User having problems with data deposition |
| Data deposition question | General question about submission (not a problem) |
| Encryption Issue | User needs advice on file encryption |
| JSON submission issue | Issue related to JSON submission |
| Large submission | To be used if submission is over 10TB |
| Missing study/dataset on live | To be used when user highlights study/dataset is published but not released |
| Phenotype data | To be used for phenotype data submission |
| Post release change | To be used when user wants to update submission objects |
| Priority submission | Use in conjunction with consortium tags |
| Programmatic Submission problem | Programmatic submitters having issues with their XML |
| Publication ID query | When people are asking how to generate accession IDs for journal |
| Study/dataset release | Releasing a study/dataset to live site |
| Submitter portal issue | There is an issue with the Submitter Portal |
| Uploader issue | User is having issue with Aspera or FTP upload |

### User Support

| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Data query | User has a specific question about the data |
| General question | General questions about GDI |
| Non - user data request | User does not have access to a dataset and needs guidance |
| Password issue | User is having an issue with their password |
| User account-related issues | Issues related to user accounts |

```

Reviewer 3: @elisavettorstensson tag tables commit :)

> * #### Ticket priority

Reviewer 2: Same as above, the ``*`` preceding the header is messing the header format

> We propose the use of three priority levels as listed below. However, each node might decide to use other levels.

Reviewer 2: Maybe phrase it in second person as well.

- **Low** - suitable for tickets that are expected to be resolved quickly and which are of routine character

- **Medium** - suitable for tickets that are more complicated and might take longer time to resolve

- **High** - suitable for tickets that need to be handled immediately, e.g. security breaches

> * #### Ticket assignee

Reviewer 2: Same as above

> Name of node helpdesk officer assigned to the ticket.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if the name of one person is enough, or if we need to add:
- The email of that person (?)
- More people that are to be kept in the loop for the issue (?)

> * #### Ticket status

Reviewer 2: Same as above

> We propose the use of the model listed below. However, each node might decide to use another model.

Reviewer 2: Same as above regarding tone

- **New** - ticket that has not yet been started to be resolved

- **In progress** (or opened) - ticket in the stage of being resolved

- **Resolved** - ticket that has been resolved and returned to the VHD

- **Blocked** - ticket that is unable to proceed with at the moment due to e.g. external dependencies

- **Deleted** - ticket that is archived e.g. since it is out of scope of the node HD

##### 8.4.2 Choose tags for negative evaluation
| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|
| ``4.2`` | Following the creation of the documentation issue after a negative ticket evaluation | Helpdesk officer |

> When the ticket was evaluated negatively then, you will choose the following tags: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the ticket was evaluated negatively then, as the NHD, choose the following tags: 
```

-  **Type of ticket**: out-of-scope 
-  **Ticket assignee**: choose from the list the name of the assigned HD member 

> -  **Ticket Status**: Deleted 

Reviewer 2: Isn't the priority missing?

Author: On purpose, I have not added the priority. I thought that we did not need priority! Haha, but I guess we can add that!

#### 8.5. Follow NHD SOP for Ticket Handling 
| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|
| ``5`` | After assigning tags | Helpdesk officer |

The assigned HD member should refer to the designated **SOP for Ticket handling** 

> - If the ticket receives a **positive evaluation**, proceed to [SOP...].
> - If the ticket receives a **negative evaluation**, proceed to [SOP...].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the ticket receives a **positive evaluation**, proceed to ``<your corresponding NHD SOP>``.
- If the ticket receives a **negative evaluation**, proceed to ``<your corresponding NHD SOP>``.
```

#### 8.6. Inform the VHD of Ticket Resolution 

| Step identifier | When | Who |
|:---|:---|:---|
| ``6`` | After the ticket handling  | Helpdesk officer |

> The VHD will be informed about the ticket resolution. 

Reviewer 2: Same with the tone

When the issue has been resolved (based on a **positive ticket evaluation**), a brief notification should be sent to the VHD. You can use the following template to send an email (by the Node GDI email address) or to communicate through the node's designated system to inform the VHD.

````

> Subject: Notification of Ticket Resolution: <Issue Number>

Reviewer 2: Is this "Issue number" the NHD's ticket's ID, or the VHD's ticket ID? Is it always a number?

Author: You’re probably right. In our ticket management system, we always have a number, so we took it for granted that it would be a number. However, I agree that "ticket ID" would be more appropriate, especially if it could include both numbers and letters. I’ll go ahead and change it to "ticket ID."

It’s also a good point that you mentioned about the NHD or VHD ticket ID. I suppose we should reply to them using the ID they defined (the VHD).

````
````
Dear <VHD Officer>,

> I am pleased to inform you that the referenced ticket <issue number> has been successfully resolved. All necessary actions have been completed, and the issue has been addressed as required.

Reviewer 2: I think in this communication there should be additional information from the node: the tags that were used, like who did it, what type was it deemed as, etc.

Also, the part of "All necessary ... are required" seems a bit redundant to me.

Author: I rewrote it ... what do you think? You can rephrase it better if you want! :-)

> If there are any additional steps or further input needed from your side, please do not hesitate to let me know.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there are any additional steps or further input from your side, please do not hesitate to let me know.
```

Thank you for your cooperation.

Best regards,  
<Name of NHD Officer>  
<GDI Node>
````

If the issue is **out of NHD's scope**, a brief explanation of this decision should be provided. You can use the following template to send an email (by Node GDI email address) or a message through the node's designated system to notify the VHD. 
````
Subject: Ticket with <issue number> Out of Scope for the <GDI node helpdesk>
````
````
Dear <VHD officer>,

> After careful evaluation, the  referenced ticket <issue number> has been determined to be out of scope for our node helpdesk due to the following reason(s):

Reviewer 2: Similarly, I would add information about the tags, to know who did it, what priority was given, etc.

Author: I fixed it!

<Reason>

> As a result, I will consider the ticket resolved and closed unless you raise any objections or further input.

Reviewer 2: If it's closed and resolved, I would phrase it so that "if you give any input" then "we'll reopen it". Also, I would say "we will consider" rather than "I".

Author: I fixed it!

# European GDI - Node Helpdesk Ticket Classification

| Metadata | Value |
|---|---|
| Template SOP number | ``GDI-SOP0008`` |
| Template SOP version |  ``v1``  |
| Topic                | Helpdesk & operations |
| Template SOP Type | Node-specific SOP |
| GDI Node |  |
| Instance version |  |

## Index

1. [Document History](#1-document-history)

2. [Glossary](#2-glossary)

3. [Roles and Responsibilities](#3-roles-and-responsibilities)

4. [Purpose](#4-purpose)

5. [Scope](#5-scope)

6. [Introduction and Background Information](#6-introduction-and-background-information)

7. [Summary or Context Diagram](#7-summary-or-context-diagram)

8. [Procedure](#8-procedure)

9. [References](#9-references)

### 1. Document History

| Template Version | Instance version | Author(s) | Description of changes | Date |
|---|---|---|---|---|

> |  ``v1``  |  | Elisavet Torstensson, Mattias Strömberg, Silvia Bahena| Created the first version of the SOP | 2025.02.04 |

Reviewer 2: I would add a new row here after this formal review is approved, so that it's clear that it was reviewed and when. 

Note that it will involve re-doing the SOP index table (but I'm sure it's fairly straightforward for you now with the script). Just to change the last-modified column of this SOP, I imagine.

Author: Do you mean that I must have a row in which I will write ``v1.0.1`` and our names and descriptions (what?) and update the date?

Author: I will give it a try ... I think that the next version after the reviews and feedback will include me (as I made the most changes), Silvia, and to be honest, I feel that you also must be included as an author as you have helped a lot. But do you think I should include you as you are the approver and reviewer, too?  Regarding "Description of changes": should I write something like "Changes based on the reviews" or something like that? And the Date: will it be after Silvia's last review?

Reviewer 2: To summarise:

- [x] The version would be ``v1.0.0``, plain and simple. It's the version that you will "merge" with the main repo, which means that it's the "first production-ready" version. That means that your previous ``v1`` would, inevitably, not be ``v1`` really, but ``v0.0.0``, which is what should be considered "in review" versions.
- [x] I think I'm a reviewer and approver, don't need to be an author here. But I appreciate the gesture.
- [x] For the description, that should work. If anything, add a hyperlink to the description to this PR. Like: ``... reviews (see [PR](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/pull/49)).``
- [ ] You have more wiggle room for the date. I would say the date is anytime between the last review of Silvia and I, when we **both** click on "accept PR", and the date where you say "okay I'll click on merge PR"

Author: I made some changes to follow your suggestions!

| FTP | File Transfer Protocol |
| GDI | Genomic Data Infrastructure |
| HD | Helpdesk |
| ID | Identity Document |
| ISM | Information Service Management |
| JSON | JavaScript Object Notation |
| NBIS | National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden |
| NHD | Node Helpdesk |
| OK | All correct |
| ORR | Organisational Roles and Responsibilities |
| RI | Research Infrastructure |
| SOP | Standard Operating Procedure |
| SP | Submitter Portal |
| UU | University of Uppsala |
| UX | User experience |
| VHD | Virtual Helpdesk  |
| XML | Extensible Markup Language  |

| Term | Definition |
|---|---|
| API | Application Programming Interface is a connection between computers or between computer programs. It is a type of software interface, offering a service to other pieces of software. |
| JIRA | is a software product developed by Atlassian that allows bug tracking, issue tracking and agile project management. |
| JSON | JavaScript Object Notation is an open standard file format and data interchange format that uses human-readable text to store and transmit data objects consisting of name–value pairs and arrays (or other serializable values).|

> | Node Helpdesk | The support team responsible for handling tickets related to data management issues associated with the node in the GDI Project. |

Reviewer 2: Is it only related to data management issues? Overall these definitions are much better than the ones in the Charter.

Author: Should I add these definitions to the Charter or not? Many of these terms were used in the tags that we got from central EGA and I thought that I must have them in our glossary. However, I assume that it would be good to have it in the Charter or not.

Reviewer 2: Definitely good to have them both in the SOP0008 and the charter. Just a matter of having the same definitions for the SOP and the Charter. In theory it could differ, but in this case I think it's best if they match.

Author: OK, absolutely!!  I can add them to the Charter!

Author: I added them to the glossary!

| Ticket | A ticket is a record in a ticket management system that tracks an issue, request, or task from creation to resolution. It helps streamline communication and workflows within teams or organizations.|
| Ticket Classification | The process of categorising support requests based on their nature, so they can be assigned to the appropriate individual or team for resolution.  |

> | Virtual Helpdesk  | The initial point of contact for inquiries and requests related to data management in the GDI project. |

Reviewer 2: I just noticed that these definitions are different than the ones in the Charter. I would say that the easiest and most consistent is to make them the same.

       - Null/Sleeping timeout errors

       - Download client issues

       - User error
    
       - Version issue

- **DAC** 

  - DAC tool query - to be used when DAC is having issues with tools 

  - DAC curation - to  be used when we do DAC curation, and update DACs for DACs i.e., change DAC members

  - Update DAC - use for contact and detail changes

  - DAC referred - to be used when we have to point a user back to a DAC e.g., they say they have been granted access but we can’t see that they have

  - DAC request to create account - DAC requesting to creating a user account

* **Archiving**

  - Data deposition - Archiving issue

  - Archiving state - file is still processing somewhere

  - Failed state - file has failed to archive

  - Tags for different files status 

- **External Comms**

  - Journal communications - to be used when in communication with Journals

* **Security**

  - GDI security issues - to be used if there is a security breach

- **Delete**

  - Non - issue - to be used when user has submitted a ticket with an issue, and then replied to the ticket saying “all ok after all” before we have had chance to reply

  - Spam

* **Consortium**

>   - Tags for different consortiums

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Archiving
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Archiving status | File is still processing in the archive |
| Data deposition - Archiving issue | Issue with archiving during deposition |
| Failed status | File has failed to archive |
### DAC
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| DAC curation | We do DAC curation or update DAC members |
| DAC referred | User pointed back to DAC for access or clarification |
| DAC request  | DAC request |
| Update DAC | Contact and detail changes in DAC |
### Distribution
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| File issues | Truncated or missing files from a dataset |
| Metadata issues | User asking for more info on metadata or its structure |
| Metadata query | User asking how to download or understand metadata |
### Download Issues
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| API Download | Issue related to API-based download |
| Alternative Download | User cannot download using any of our tools |
| Dataset/file requesting issues | Problems requesting specific datasets/files |
| Datasets/files request not in client | Files not available with the download tool |
| Decryption/unzipping problems | Issues with decrypting or unzipping files |
| Download client issues | General issues with the download client |
| Firewall issues | Download issues caused by firewalls |
| Key request | Request for decryption keys |
| Log in problems | Problems logging into download client or portal |
| Null/Sleeping timeout errors | Timeout-related errors during download |
| User error | Errors due to user actions |
| Version issue | Problems due to client version |
### External Communications
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Journal communications | Communications with journals |
### Issue Tracking
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| JIRA | To be used when you need to create a JIRA ticket for an issue that Helpdesk cannot resolve and requires dev involment |
### Other
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Consortium | Tags related to different consortiums |
| Non - issue | User submitted a ticket but later said the issue was resolved |
### Scope & Feedback
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Documentation improvement | To be used when a user highlights our documentation is wrong/out of date/not clear |
| Interface issue | To be used when there is an issue with web pages |
| Out-of-scope | Issues that are out-of-scope of the nodes' helpdesk and are redirected to VHD if required|
| UX | Development feedback - to be used when a user provides feedback about service tools |
### Security
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| GDI security issues | Security-related issues in GDI |
### Submission
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| API - Submission | To be used when a submitter is using the submission API |
| Data deposition | User submitting data |
| Data deposition intention | To be used when initial submission request comes in |
| Data deposition policy documents | To be used when users query if their DAA is OK or ask questions about DAA |
| Data deposition problem | User having problems with data deposition |
| Data deposition question | General question about submission (not a problem) |
| Encryption Issue | User needs advice on file encryption |
| JSON submission issue | Issue related to JSON submission |
| Large submission | To be used if submission is over 10TB |
| Missing study/dataset on live | To be used when user highlights study/dataset is published but not released |
| Phenotype data | To be used for phenotype data submission |
| Post release change | To be used when user wants to update submission objects |
| Priority submission | Use in conjunction with consortium tags |
| Programmatic Submission problem | Programmatic submitters having issues with their XML |
| Publication ID query | When people are asking how to generate accession IDs for journal |
| Study/dataset release | Releasing a study/dataset to live site |
| Submitter portal issue | There is an issue with the Submitter Portal |
| Uploader issue | User is having issue with Aspera or FTP upload |
### User Support
| Tag | Definition |
|-----|------------|
| Data query | User has a specific question about the data |
| General question | General questions about GDI |
| Non - user data request | User does not have access to a dataset and needs guidance |
| Password issue | User is having an issue with their password |
| User account-related issues | Issues related to user accounts |
```
